Long have our contests called for you, my handsome Midas lend a leisured ear to competing swains.
I am ready: the sequestered charm of the holy wood is an invitation to pipings: lay skill upon your minstrelsy.
If prizes are lacking, the confidence of skill is dumb.
Nay, two stakes will make our confidence endure: either yonder he goat, whose forehead is decked with the white mark, or this light pipe set round with moveable knobs, the memorable gift of Faunus, denizen of the woods.
Whether you prefer to stake the he goat or Faunus gift, choose which of the two you are to lose but the surer omen, I fancy, will be the pipe which, instead of being a stake, is as good as taken away from the rejected competitor.
What avails it to waste the daylight in wild words? Let the winner s fame rise from the umpire s bosom.
The spoil is mine, because my mind prompts me to recount a Caesar s praises: to such a task the prize is ever due.
My heart too hath Apollo stirred with celestial lips and bade me sing changing strains to my lyre which has already won praise.
Proceed, my lads, to render the promised song: so may God aid you as ye sing! Ladas, begin you first: Thamyras in turn will bring his tribute.
Greatest of gods, eternal ruler of the sky, whether, Phoebus, it is thy pleasure to make trial of the eloquent strings and set to melodies on the lyre the first principles of the world, even as in song the maiden priestess raves and chants with lips o er mastered, so may I be allowed to have looked on gods, allowed to reveal the story of the universe: whether that mind was the mind of the sky or likeness of the sun, worthy of both divine principles Apollo took his place, brilliant in purple and gold, and sped thunder with his hand. Such was the divine power which has begotten the world and has inwoven with the seven borders the artificer s zones and blends them all with love. Such was Phoebus, when, rejoicing in the slaughter of the dragon, he produced learned minstrelsy to the beat of the plectrum: if there are any dwellers in heaven, they speak with voice like this. The band of the learned sisterhood had come to the sounds of the music. . . .
Hither, hither, ye Pierian Muses, approach in the fleet dance! Here flourishes the wealth of Helicon here is your own Apollo! You too, O Troy, raise your hallowed ashes to the stars, and display this work to Agamemnon s Mycenae! Now has it proved of such value to have fallen! Rejoice, ye ruins praise your funeral pyres: tis your nurseling that raises you again! . . . full beard and white hair shone in undimmed honour. So when he filled the poet s ears with accents divine, he undid the golden circlet from his fair brow and veiled the emperor s head with its deserved attire. Hard by stood Mantua, erstwhile as forceful as the lips which sang of Ilion but now with her own hands she began to tear her writings to shreds.
The poem is incomplete. Probably Thamyras verses are unfinished and certainly the judgement of Midas is lacking.
