Why silent, Mystes? Worries disturb my joys: worry pursues my meals: it rises even more amid my cups: a load of anxiety enjoys burdening my happy hours.
I don t quite take you. Well, I don t like to tell the whole.
Mayhap a wolf has tricked your cattle? My watchful band of dogs fears not enemies. Sleep can o ershadow even the watchful.
Tis something deeper, Glyceranus no open trouble: you are wrong.
Yet the sea is not usually disturbed without winds.
You may not think it, but tis satiety that plagues my joys.
Pleasure and drowsihead are commonly in love with complaints.
Well then, if you are intent on knowing the reasons for my pangs
There is an elm tree with outspread branches which will cover us with its quivering shade, and, look! the green sward bids us lie down on the soft meadow: must tell what is your reason for silence.
Do you see how the villagers, outspread o er the well worn turf, offer their yearly vows and begin the regular altar worship? Temples reek of wine the hollow drums resound to the hands the Maenalids lead the youthful ring dances amid the holy rites joyful sounds the pipe from the elm hangs the he goat doomed to sacrifice, and with neck already stripped lays his vitals bare. Surely then the offspring of to day fight with no doubtful hazard? Surely the blockish herd denies not to these times the realms of gold? The days of Saturn have returned with Justice the Maid: the age has returned in safety to the olden ways. With hope unruffled does the harvester garner all his corn ears the Wine god betrays the languor of old age the herd wanders on the lea we reap with no sword, nor do towns in fast closed walls prepare unutterable war: there is not any woman who, dangerous in her motherhood, gives birth to an enemy. Unarmed our youth can dig the fields, and the boy, trained to the slow moving plough, marvels at the sword hanging in the abode of his fathers. Far from us is the luckless glory of Sulla and the threefold crisis when dying Rome despaired of her final resources and sold her martial arms. Now doth earth untilled yield fresh produce from the rich soil, now are the wild waves no longer angry with the unmenaced ship: tigers gnaw their curbs, lions endure the cruel yoke be gracious, chaste Lucina: thine own Apollo now is King.
The poem thus relates the shepherd s but not the of verse .
