Corydon, why sit you silent with a visage that bodes something ever and anon? Why sit you in an unwonted place, beneath this plane tree at whose roots sprawl the prattling waters? Maybe you like the watery bank, where the breeze from the neighbouring stream assuages the heat of day?
For long, Meliboeus, have I been pondering verses, verses of no woodland ring but fit to celebrate the golden age, to praise even that very god who is sovereign over nations and cities and toga clad peace.
Sweet of sound are your lays and tis not with cold disdain that Apollo looks upon you, young Corydon: but the divinities of mighty Rome are not to be extolled in the same style as the sheepfold of Menalcas.
Whate er my song, though it seem boorish to a critic s ears and worthy of record only in my own village, yet, as things are, my awkwardness, even if lacking in poetry s polish and skill, must surely win approval for its loyalty. Beneath this same rock shaded by the nearest pine tree, kindred strains to mine are composed by my brother Amyntas, whose neighbouring years bring his time of birth near to mine.
Ah! do you not now stop the lad from joining his reeds in bonds of fragrant wax, as with a father like frown you often checked him when he tried to play on slender hemlock stems? Not once alone, Corydon, have I remarked you giving advice like this: Boy, break your pipes, forsake the beggarly Muses. Go, gather acorns instead and red cornel cherries lead herds to the milking pails loud in your cry through the city carry your milk for sale. What will the pipe bring you to ward off famine? Of a truth, no one repeats my lay save the wind sped echo from yonder crags.
This, I confess, I did say, Meliboeus but it was long ago our times are not the same now, our god is changed. Hope wears a more radiant smile in sooth, it is your doing that I no more gather strawberries and brambles, or assuage hunger with green mallow. Your kindness feeds us with grain. You, in pity for our means and quick taught youth, stop us from dispelling hunger pangs with beech nuts in winter. Lo! tis thanks to you, Meliboeus, that no complaint passes our lips: thanks to you we recline well fed in care free shade, and enjoy the woodland of Amaryllis. But for thee, Meliboeus, we should of late have looked upon the furthest, yea, the furthest shores of earth, Geryon s meadows exposed to the Moor s fury, where mighty Baetis, they say, with flowing currents strikes upon the western sands. Doubtless should I now lie an outcast at the world s end, oh, woe! and, but an hireling, among Iberian flocks should be playing on sevenfold pipe my unavailing scrannel tunes: no one would give a glance at my muses among the thorn bushes: he himself, our divine sovereign himself, mayhap would never lend a leisured ear to me, nor hear, in sooth, the distant sound of my prayers at earth s furthest ends. But if perchance no sweeter melody attract your ear, if the songs of others fail to charm you more than mine, will you let the page I compose to day be corrected by your critical file? For not only have the gods given to you to tell husbandmen of coming rain storms and of the kind of sunrise a golden sunset offers, but you are often the singer of sweet poetry, and now the Muse rewards you with Bacchic ivy clusters, now fair Apollo shades your brow with laurel. But if you would show favour to my nervous attempts, perhaps I might make trial of those reeds which skillful Iollas presented me yesterday with the words, This pipe wins over savage bulls, and makes sweetest melody to our own Faunus. It once was owned by Tityrus, who among these hills of yours was the first to sing his tuneful lay on the Hyblaean pipe.
You aim high, Corydon, if you strive to be Tityrus. He was a bard inspired, one who could on the reed pipe outplay the lyre. Often, while he sang, beasts of the wild fawned in frolic near, and the oak came close and halted there: did he but sing, a Naiad would adorn him with red acanthus and dress with a comb his tangled locks.
He is, I own, a poet divine, Meliboeus, but mayhap Phoebus will not say me nay either: do you but favourably hear me for we know how far Apollo is from slighting you.
Begin, my favour is with you but take heed lest perchance your tinkling pipe breathe from boxwood as frail as is its usual sound whene er the praise of Alexis is the theme. Rather these reeds, these far more you must pursue: press the pipes which sang of woods worthy a consul. Begin have no doubt. See, your brother Amyntas comes too. In alternate refrain his voice will answer your verses. Draw out your lay: dally not: in turns resume the song. You first, Corydon, and you will come next, Amyntas.
From Jove let every bard begin, whoso sings of the sky, whoso essays to describe the Olympian burden which Atlas bears. For myself, may I win a glad propitious smile from the imperial lips of him whose incarnate godhead rules our lands and whose youthful prowess rules the eternal peace.
On me too may Caesar, with eloquent Apollo for comrade, look with favour: nor let him disdain to approach my hills which even Phoebus loves, which Jove himself protects where blooms the laurel, destined to see many an imperial triumph, where rises too the laurel s companion tree.
Even he, controller of the heavens in heat and cold, our father Jupiter himself, to whom you yourself, Caesar, now stand next, doth oft lay down his thunderbolt awhile to visit Cretan meads, and, in some verdant grot reclining, mid Dicte s forests listens to Curetic lays.
Do you see how the green woods are hushed at the sound of Caesar s name? I remember how, despite the swoop of a storm, the grove, even as now, sank sudden into peace with boughs at rest. And I said: A god, surely a god has driven the east winds hence. Forthwith the Parrhasian reeds let their notes go free.
Do you see how a sudden vigour thrills the tender lambs, how the ewe s teats are more heavily laden with abundant milk, however, just after shearing, the fleeces of the dams grow in luxuriant waves? This once ere now, I mind me, I noted in this valley, and how the shepherds said, Pales has come.
Yes, and him doth all earth and every nation adore. He is beloved of the gods as you see, the arbutus tree pays him silent homage at the sound of his name the sluggish earth has warmed to life and yielded flowers invoke him, and in his honour the wood spreads thick its perfumed foliage, and the spellbound tree breaks into bud again.
As soon as the earth felt his divine influence, crops began to come in richer abundance, where furrows erstwhile disappointed hope at length the beans scarce rattle in their well filled pods: no harvest is choked with the spread of the barren tare, or whitens with unproductive oats.
No more does the digger dread to ply the criminal spade: what treasure trove of gold chance offers him he puts to use. Nor, as of late, does the ploughman, while turning up his acres, fear that an ingot may ring against the impact of his ploughshare now openly he pushes on more and more with plough deep driven.
By his favour the cultivator can give to Ceres the first corn ears and to Bromius pour libation of wine till now unbroached thanks to him the light clad vintager tramples the bursting clusters and the village throng applauds their good mayor, who holds magnificent games at the meeting of the highways.
He it is who bestows peace on my hills. See, it is through him that no one prevents me, if tis my pleasure to sing or to tread the sluggish grass in triple measure. In choral dance too may I sing, and I may preserve my songs on the green bark and no more do boisterous trumpets drown our reed pipes note.
Emboldened by Caesar s divine protection, Lycean Pan himself revisits the groves and Faunus reclines untroubled in the lovely shade. The Naiad bathes in the unruffled stream and, free from the risk of treading on human gore, the Oread courses swiftly o er mountain ranges, her foot unstained.
O ye gods, I pray you, recall only after a long span of life this youth, whom ye, I know it well, have sent us from heaven itself: or rather untwine his allotted skein of mortality and grant him celestial threads of the metal of eternity. Let him be a god and yet loath to exchange his palace from the sky.
Thou too, Caesar, whether thou art Jupiter himself on earth in altered guise, or one other of the powers above concealed under an assumed mortal semblance for thou art very God rule, I pray thee, this world, rule its peoples for ever! Let love of heaven count as nought with thee: abandon not, O Sire, the peace thou hast begun!
I used to think they were but rustic lays which the sylvan deities bestowed on you lays fit for cloddish ears but what you have even now sung on well matched pipes has so clear, so sweet a fall that I would not liefer sip the nectarous honey which Pelignian swamps are wont to sip.
Oh! the songs of mine which run in humble verse would then, my Meliboeus, resound, if even on these hills I were called the owner of a homestead, if ever I had the fortune to see pastures of my own. Too often does malicious poverty pluck my ear and say, The sheepfold is your task. But you, Meliboeus, if in spite of all you think that any of my poems are not to be disdained, then take them to the Emperor God. For you have the right to visit the holy inner shrine of the Palatine Phoebus. Then you shall be to me such as he was who brought Tityrus of tuneful song from the woods to the queen of cities, showed him the divine powers, and said, We will scorn the sheepfold, Tityrus, and sing first the countryside but, later, the weapons of war.
Oh, that a fairer fortune would look upon my labours and that the God in person would show favour to deserving youth! Yet meanwhile we will slay tender kid and prepare withal the courses of a hasty meal.
Take forthwith the sheep to the river. Now tis the raging heat of summer: now the sun curtails the shadows and brings them closer to our feet.
